# cs465-fullstack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

## Architecture
# Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
  Full stack development requires the use of several unique technologies.  By using MongoDB, Express, Angular, and Node.js (the MEAN stack) in this full stack project, we can seamlessly integrate these different technologies using a single scripting language, JavaScript.  The frontend architecture is similar between Express and Angular, which have been used for the customer-facing website and the administrator single-page application (SPA) respectively.  Both frameworks use similar concepts of routing and modularity to create a dynamic frontend experience for users of the application.  Some differences include the use of the MVC pattern during development with Express, which organizes data (model), UI elements (view), and control logic (controller) and allows for large scalability.  Angular uses a slightly different architecture consisting of components and services, which communicate and interact with distributed aspects of the system, such as the Node.js sever, and create a fluid, highly responsive user experience for administrators.

# Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
  Since data is being transferred back and forth in JSON format, MongoDB is the perfect choice for our backend.  MongoDB returns data in JSON format by default and this in turn makes our codebase much more intuitive and efficient.  Also, using the Mongoose ODM library, we can connect to the database, define data models and schema, and run MongoDB commands directly using Express.  
  
## Functionality
# How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
  Simply put, JSON is a data-interchange format used for transferring application data back and forth efficiently between different technologies.  JavaScript, on the other hand, is a scripting language that runs in all browsers as well as the Node.js backend server.  Node.js provides many useful libraries for backend work, and together with the Express web-application framework integrates frontend and backend components using the MVC architecture consisting of data models, templates/views, and controller logic.

# Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
While developing the backend using Express and Node.js we used the Handlebars templating engine to organize redundant HTML elements into JavaScript functions using the signature handlebars syntax: {{ example }}.  Headers and footers typically appear on multiple pages on customer-facing websites, so the concept of using templates or partials makes for great readability and simplicity when developing views.  While developing the Angular SPA, we used a similar practice, this time with components.  Using the concept of selectors, we were able to define unique components to be reused on the frontend.  This process organizes specific logic such as rendering data from the backend and other site elements such as navigation into separate modules, lowering the risk of introducing errors and bugs through ‘spaghetti syntax.’  We then defined console outputs within these components to determine precise pipeline locations that errors or other mishaps may have occurred. 

## Testing
# Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
Endpoints are the gateway to the data, and at the grandest scale, the control of the entire application.  To integrate several application features such as an administrator SPA and a Node.js backend server, we are required to define methods for requesting information from the server to client and vice versa.  An admin-only page requires security measures to verify that users are who they say they are before interacting with sensitive application functionality or user data.  Using additional technologies such as the Passport authentication middleware and JSON Web Tokens (JWT), we were able to define the logic necessary to validate a user’s credentials before giving them access to privileged functionality.  Tools such as Postman were incredibly helpful for verifying the backend was performing its authentication processes efficiently and the Developer Tools featured in the Google Chrome browser served a critical role in outputting issues or errors emanating from the client-side.  

## Reflection
# How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?
I came into this course with a small understanding of HTML request methods, RESTful APIS, and MongoDB.  The MVC architecture was challenging for me to initially wrap my head around, as it is very complex, but I quickly learned why this format can be beneficial for readability as well as performance.  I had zero experience with the separate runtime and frameworks used, namely Node.js, Express, and Angular.  This course pushed me to quickly learn the concepts of these different technologies and the methods and practices developers can use to tie them together efficiently.  I’m glad to say I’ve picked up a bunch of knowledge on JavaScript as well, this was just a bit scary at first!  On another note, outside of the technical knowledge I’ve gained through this course, I believe I picked up on some unique soft skills that will surely help me in my career.  The videos and walkthroughs provided weekly were engaging, intuitive, and incredibly conducive to learning and achievement.  The thoughtfulness put into these resources is rare to find in most educational and professional environments.  I would like to bring this kind of inspiration to the projects I involve myself in throughout my career as I think these skills will ultimately make me not just an insightful developer but a great colleague as well!    
